Fearlessness

Greetings graduates, families, friends, and university colleagues.  Thank you all for being here, and congratulations on all that you have achieved individually and as a community.  

Graduates, as you prepare to leave the University of Colorado Boulder, I'd like to encourage you to reflect on what you are taking with you when you leave.  I don’t mean what stuff you’re taking with you, of course.  I mean:  What do you know now that you didn’t know when you first arrived at CU?  Do you approach problems differently now than you used to?  How do you see yourself as a learner?  What can you DO now that you couldn’t do at the beginning of your first year?  

And I’d like to provide a frame for how you answer those questions by way of a personal anecdote.

I’ve only ever given one graduation address before, and it was so long ago that most of you were still in diapers.   The audience was much smaller, my hair was much smaller, and the cultural context was much different than the culture of this wonderful University and city.  In short, I have very little prior direct experience with the job I’m doing today.  In spite of that, when Dr. Bowers approached me and asked me to give this address, I gladly and immediately said yes.   As you might imagine, I felt extremely honored, but at the same time I felt trepidatious.  I also felt some other GRE words that I can’t remember right now.  But I didn’t feel afraid.  I took the challenge of delivering this address extremely seriously, but I did not FEAR it.  

Dr. Thomas Cech, one of this campus’s nobel laureates, said that one of the goals of a graduate program he had helped to architect was to produce graduates who are intellectually fearless.  That doesn’t mean arrogant or reckless.  Rather, it means that you aren’t afraid to keep on learning, especially when it comes to learning from people and practices that are outside your own disciplinary boundaries.  You aren’t afraid to try something new and fail the first time you try it, because you know that learning will come out of that experience.  It means you are confident that you can apply what you already know how to do to a new situation, even one outside your own academic discipline.  And it means that you are capable of approaching unfamiliar areas, recognizing they have tools and knowledge applicable to your own problems, and that you are willing to invest your own time and intellectual capital in learning and applying them.

That willingness to learn and to reconsider your approach also means that you aren't afraid to have your own ideas overturned.  You aren't afraid to learn that there is a better way to do something than the way you are currently doing it.  You aren't afraid to learn that the ideas you hold dear, your most beautiful ideas about how all the bits of the world work, might be wrong.  My own PhD advisor, Dr. Paul Sherman, once told me, "I'll fight you to the death for an idea, but if you prove me wrong, I will thank you."  That is intellectual fearlessness.  Not just the willingness to be wrong, but to actually be able to take delight in being shown something new, even if it disproves something you previously held dear.  And that is what makes intellectual fearlessness the opposite of dogma.  Dogma keeps us wedded to ideas whether those ideas are working or not, whether they make sense or not. Intellectual fearlessness keeps us fresh, adaptable, current, pragmatic, and focused on solutions. 

As you look at the faculty members behind me here, you see people who are widely regarded as world experts in their respective areas of research.  Yet I would wager that there are skills they currently apply every day in their work  that they did not directly learn in a classroom as undergraduates nor even as graduate students.  Instead, their formal training as students gave them something much more general: they learned how to recognize their own gaps in understanding; they learned how to teach new things to themselves; they learned how and when to draw upon the expertise of others; and they learned how to recognize when it was time to forge their own paths.  In short, at some point early in their academic careers, they each became intellectually fearless.

In my opinion, intellectual fearlessness is partially a state of mind and partially a set of skills and tools for approaching knowledge.  The skills and tools I'm talking about include things like considering how observations and data support or refute an idea; being able to imagine what kinds of data are necessary to make accurate decisions; being able to see past belief and dogma to observable facts and their inescapable logical conclusions; recognizing that honest consideration of multiple explanations is the fastest path toward true progress; and more.  As students in the EBIO department, you all have had many opportunities to develop and sharpen these tools and skills.  So, even if your future career plans do not include being a "Professional Ecologist and Evolutionary Biologist", I hope you see these skills and tools as having extremely high value.  Because employers want people with these skills, and even more broadly, our country and our world desperately need people with these skills.  

From making personal choices in your own life to contributing positively to issues of global importance, the approaches to knowledge that you have learned here can only serve you well.  Consider two examples of the most challenging issues in the world around us all, right now.  Example #1: As a country, how can we move past fruitless debates on climate change? Example #2: How can we deal with and move forward on the very difficult social issues that are ravaging communities in places like Baltimore, Maryland, and Ferguson, Missouri?  There are no magic formulas or easy answers to these questions, but I can tell you one thing about which I am extremely confident: if we rely on dogmatic ways of thinking, we will stay trapped in these problems without hope of a solution.  The reason is simple: dogmatic thinking is born of fear; born of the simple fear that we might be wrong and someone else might be right.  The problem with dogmatic thinking--and the fundamental reason it does not reliably lead to solutions--is that no matter how many believers a particular dogma creates, it doesn't change the facts.  Climate change is a problem.  Racism is a problem.  The solutions to these problems will not be born from dogma.  The solutions will be born from people like you, people who have the intellectual fearlessness to come to a problem with fresh minds, with new ideas, with ideas from unconventional places; people who are willing to analyze; people who are willing to face the inconvenient truths they and others uncover; people who even enjoy finding out that they are wrong if that means progress.

Graduates, you have skills and tools and knowledge and ways of thinking that have extremely high value in a world that seems to be changing faster every day.  You can design and predict and test and analyze and communicate.  Don't be afraid to do it.  

 




